US STEM Foundation President Doug Donegan Discusses Local Science,
Technology, Engineering and Math Initiatives

WashingtonExec interviewed US STEM Foundation President, Doug Donegan,
about the organization’s mission and how companies and employees alike
can support Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM)
initiatives.  Doug talks about the importance of creating opportunities
for students to participate in hands-on experiential learning activities
that challenge their intellect and enhance their ability to creatively
collaborate.


WashintonExec: What motivated the creation of the US STEM Foundation?

Doug Donegan: Four years ago a group of parents, teachers and business
leaders who sought to give students more opportunities to participate in
hands-on technology-based activities formed the US STEM Foundation in
Haymarket, Virginia.  Battlefield High School had a growing robotics
program there that was drawing students to STEM activities at an
impressive rate.  Not only did the students respond well to the robotics
activities and the inherent technical lessons, they were learning some
significant life lessons about collaboration and responsibility.  What
started as a club became and team and evolved into a culture of
excellence fueled by the students’ enthusiasm for the activities and
challenges.  At the time I was a corporate sponsor and from the
sidelines found the whole experience to be motivating and inspiring. 
Personally, I was jealous of the opportunities that these students had,
but at the same time I was thrilled by their level of engagement and the
way the students grew personally and academically.

It was clear that these robotics activities were changing the trajectory
of the students.  However, we could also see that the enthusiasm and
attraction was going to quickly outpace the resources.  We also
recognized that this was not a unique experience, other communities were
going to be experiencing the same predicament and were going to need
help.  Extracurricular STEM programs are resource intensive.  They
require investment in special material sets, tools and infrastructure. 
Just as important are the personal investments needed; these programs
require mentors and advisors to assist the students and foster their
development.  When it comes to larger group activities, volunteers are
needed to coordinate events and make sure they run smoothly and safely. 
None of these activities or events could happen without donors whose
generosity helps subsidize the costs of facilities, infrastructure and
materials.

The US STEM Foundation was formed to address these needs. Fundamentally,
we understood that STEM activities needed a hybrid support structure
that combines the best elements of the sports league and band booster
models.  Much like a football or soccer team, extracurricular STEM
activities requires coaches with knowledge of the activity, special
equipment, and space to practice and play games.  And like a band
booster club, STEM activities need to come together to raise money for
instruments, practice sessions and travel.  Bringing together these
models, the US STEM Foundation has defined its mission to coordinate and
subsidize activities that inspire the next generation of STEM
professionals leveraging programs hands-on activities, services and
strategies that will engage, educate, develop and create responsible
citizens.


